---
name: 2
title: Saving Lives, One Needles at a Time
date: 2021-05-15T15:22:17.461Z
description: Among the various cancer treatments, the development of cancer
  vaccines may be the cure
featured_image: images/vaccine-hero.jpeg
tags:
  - BIOLOGY
---
As the world awaits vaccine roll-out for the COVID-19 virus, the fight against the pandemic continues. Vaccines have been the optimal solution to many infectious and non-infectious diseases. This treatment involves exposing your body to a safe amount of the disease for your body to develop specific antigens against the virus, resulting in immunity. Within the 21st century, the significance of preventing the spread of infectious diseases resulted in the development of many vaccines as a treatment for HIV, tuberculosis and malaria. Upon recently, vaccines and their development are pointing in the direction of cancer treatment. 



Similar to the antigens (biological markers) found on infectious viruses, distinct antigens were discovered on the surface of tumour cells suggesting the potential creation of anti-tumour vaccines. Studies observed that exposure to small, controlled amounts of tumour tissue can induce an immune response that can reduce the size of the tumour. Though many various strategies have been tested, with varying degrees of effectiveness, many promising results have been achieved through the use of agents that increase the likelihood that the human immune system can recognize the antigen. 



Although promising results were recorded in a petri dish, there are limited clinical trials with successful results. Cancer vaccine developed to treat prostate cancer resulted in a 22% reduction in the risk of death, however more effective when combined with additional therapies. Clinical trials for various other types of cancers, such as breast cancer, lung cancer, pancreatic cancer and melanoma, observed a longer duration of survival in patients treated with the vaccine compared to a placebo-administered control group. Additional clinical trials are required to develop a successful vaccine. 



Currently, the anti-tumour vaccine has to undergo numerous testing and clinical trials to develop a universal application. However, the cancer vaccine may prove to be the solution in our fight against cancer and to save millions of lives. 



## **References:**

de Gruijl, T. D., & Curiel, D. T. (1999). Cancer vaccine strategies get bigger and better. Nature Medicine, 5(10), 1124–1125. https://doi.org/10.1038/13443 

Jäger, E., Jäger, D., & Knuth, A. (2002). Clinical cancer vaccine trials. Current Opinion in Immunology, 14(2), 178–182. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0952-7915(02)00318-7 

Tahamtan, A., Charostad, J., Hoseini Shokouh, S. J., & Barati, M. (2017). An Overview of History, Evolution, and Manufacturing of Various Generations of Vaccines. Journal of Archives in Military Medicine, In Press(In Press). https://doi.org/10.5812/jamm.12315 

Wandall, H. H., & Tarp, M. A. (n.d.). Therapeutic Cancer Vaccines: Clinical Trials and Applications. Carbohydrate-Based Vaccines and Immunotherapies, 333–366. https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470473283.ch11 

Wang, R.-F., & Rosenberg, S. A. (2006). Vaccine Development Against Novel Breast Cancer Antigens. Wiley Online Library, 170(1). https://doi.org/10.21236/ada404639